DOCS-11819-mqtt3-studio-editorial-kt (#1610)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: mqtt 3/1.0.0/modules/ROOT/pages/edits/mqtt3-connector-studio-configuration.adoc

= Use Studio to Configure MQTT 3 Connector 1.0

Anypoint Studio (Studio) editors help you design and update your Mule applications, properties, and configuration files.

To add and configure a connector in Studio:

. <<create-mule-project,Create a Mule project>>.
. <<add-connector-to-project,Add the connector to your Mule project>>.
. <<configure-input-source,Configure a source for the connector's flow>>.
. <<add-connector-operation,Add a connector operation to the flow>>.
. <<configure-global-element,Configure a global element for the connector>>.
. <<configure-protocol,Configure a connection protocol>>.
. <<configure-authentication,Configure credentials for authentication>>.

> . <<configure-failover,Configure a fail-over server list>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<configure-failover,Configure a failover server list>>.
```

. <<enable-file-persistence,Enable file persistence>>.
. <<configure-advanced-options,Configure advanced connection options>>.

When you run the connector, you can view the app log to check for problems, as described in <<view-app-log,View the App Log>>.

If you are new to configuring connectors in Studio, see xref:connectors::introduction/intro-config-use-studio.adoc[Use Studio to Configure a Connector]. If, after reading this topic, you need additional information about the connector fields, see the xref:jms-connector-reference.adoc[JMS Connector Reference].

[[create-mule-project]]
== Create a Mule Project

In Studio, create a new Mule project in which to add and configure the connector:

. In Studio, select *File > New > Mule Project*.
. Enter a name for your Mule project and click *Finish*.

[[add-connector-to-project]]
== Add the Connector to Your Mule Project

Add Anypoint Connector for MQTT 3 (MQTT 3 Connector) to your Mule project to automatically populate the XML code with the connector's namespace and schema location and to add the required dependencies to the project's `pom.xml` file:

. In the *Mule Palette* view, click *(X) Search in Exchange*.

> . In the *Add Dependencies to Project* window, type `mqtt 3` in the search field.

Reviewer: Are there any potential problems searching this string with the space included?

. Click *MQTT 3 Connector* in *Available modules*.
. Click *Add*.
. Click *Finish*.

Adding a connector to a Mule project in Studio does not make that connector available to other projects in your Studio workspace.

[[configure-input-source]]
== Configure a Source

A source initiates a flow when a specified condition is met.

> You can configure one of these input sources to use with JMS Connector:

Reviewer: Is "JMS Connector" correct here?

* *MQTT3 > On New Message* +
Initiates a flow by listening for incoming messages
* *HTTP > Listener* +
Initiates a flow each time it receives a request on the configured host and port
* *Scheduler* +
Initiates a flow when a time-based condition is met

For example, to configure an *On New Message* source, follow these steps:

. In the *Mule Palette* view, select *MQTT3 > On New Message*.
. Drag *On New Message* to the Studio canvas.
. In the *On New Message* configuration screen, optionally change the value of the *Display Name* field.
. Click the plus sign (*+*) next to the *Connector configuration* field to configure a global element that can be used by all instances of the source in the app.

> . In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select either one of the connection types to provide to this configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select one of the connection types to provide to this configuration:
```
"either" implies two

* *MQTT3 URL Connection*

> * *MQTT3 Fail-Over Connection*

Reviewer: Note that in narrative use, "fail over" is the verb presentation and "failover" is the adj. and n. presentation.

* *MQTT3 Form Connection*

[start=6]
. Set the mandatory *Client ID* to identify an MQTT connection to a broker.

> . On the *General* tab also specify the connection information for the connector, such as required libraries for the broker and advanced connection options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *General* tab, also specify connection information such as required libraries for the broker and advanced connection options.
```

> . On the *LWT* tab, optionally specify last will and testament message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *LWT* tab, optionally specify the last will and testament message.
```
GLOBALLY eval. this name for capitalization or font use: "the/a last will and testament message," "the/a Last Will and Testament message," `last will and testament`, `lastwillandtestament`, and so on.

. On the *TLS/SSL* tab, optionally specify a TLS configuration.
. On the *Advanced* tab, optionally specify a reconnection strategy.

> . Click *OK* to close the window.

Reviewer: Is "to close the window" necessary?

. In the *On New Message* configuration screen, in *Topics*, select *Edit inline* to list the topics that the listener subscribes to.
. Click the plus sign (*+*) to configure a topic.

> . In the *Topic* configuration screen, set *Topic filter* that represents a single or multilevel subscription to a topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Topic* configuration screen, set *Topic filter*, which represents a single or multilevel subscription to a topic.
```

. Set *QoS* to any of the following quality of service levels:
+
* *AT_MOST_ONCE*
* *AT_LEAST_ONCE*

> * *EXACTLY_ONCE*

Reviewer: Are these ever referred to in the UI as QoS 0, 1, or 2? We use those designations in another topic.

. Click *Finish*.

[[add-connector-operation]]
== Add a Connector Operation to the Flow

When you add a connector operation to your flow, you immediately define a specific operation for that connector to perform.

To add an operation for MQTT 3 Connector, follow these steps:

. In the *Mule Palette* view, select *MQTT3* and then select the desired operation.

> . Drag the operation onto the Studio canvas and to the right of the input source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Drag the operation onto the Studio canvas and to the right of the input source:
```

.MQTT 3 Connector operations

> image::mqtt3-operations.png[Select any of the MQTT 3 Connector Operations from the Mule Palette view on the right side of Anypoint Studio]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::mqtt3-operations.png[Select any of the MQTT 3 Connector operations from the Mule Palette view on the right side of Anypoint Studio]
```

[[configure-global-element]]
== Configure a Global Element for the Connector

When you configure a connector, it’s best to configure a global element that all instances of that connector in the app can use. MQTT 3 Connector comes with default values for both publishing and consuming messages. To use the connector, the only requirement is that you must configure which connection to use and that you specify a value for the client ID, which will uniquely identify that connection.

> The client ID is mandatory because it identifies an MQTT connection to a broker. Define a meaningful name that uniquely identifies a client or device that connects to an MQTT broker and not a random string.

Reviewer: I got a little confused here because this narrative is different from the template. 
I wonder if you need to comment about the default values?
I question the wording "configure which connection to use"; do you mean "select" rather than "configure"?
And I question the repetition of the text about selecting a unique and intuitive ID: isn't that standard? do we have to add "not a random string"?

Reviewer: Would this work?
```suggestion
When you configure a connector, configure a global element that all instances of that connector in the app can use. Configuring a global element requires you to provide the authentication credentials that the connector requires to access a specific MQTT connection to a broker. 
```

To configure the global element for MQTT 3 Connector, follow these steps:

. Select the operation in the Studio canvas.
. In the configuration screen for the operation, click the plus sign (*+*) next to the *Connector configuration* field to access the global element configuration fields.

> . In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select either one of the connection types to provide to this configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select one of the connection types to provide to this configuration:
```

* *MQTT3 URL Connection*
* *MQTT3 Fail-Over Connection*
* *MQTT3 Form Connection*

[start=6]

> . Set the mandatory *Client ID* to identify an MQTT connection to a broker, for example `smart-bentley-123`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Specify a unique and intuitive *Client ID* to identify an MQTT connection to a broker, for example, `smart-bentley-123`.
```
I would not include "mandatory" here because any step that is not qualified using "optional" is by default mandatory.

> . Set the *URL* to connect to a broker, for example `tcp://127.0.0.1:1883`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Specify the *URL* to connect to a broker, for example, `tcp://127.0.0.1:1883`.
```
"set" can mean various methods to make a choice, rather than just typing/inputting text into a field, so I recommend replacing it with something more specific to typing or creating.

> . On the *General* tab also specify the connection information for the connector, such as required libraries for the broker and advanced connection options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *General* tab, specify the connection such as required libraries for the broker and advanced connection options.
```

> . On the *LWT* tab, optionally specify last will and testament message.

Reviewer: ditto prev. comments about how to present "last will and testament"

. On the *SSL/TLS* tab, optionally specify a TLS configuration.
. On the *Advanced* tab, optionally specify a reconnection strategy.
. Click *OK* to close the window.

The following screenshot shows the MQTT 3 Connector *Global Element Properties* window in Anypoint Studio:

image::mqtt3-global-configuration.png[MQTT 3 Connector Global Element Properties window]

> In the XML editor, the `<mqtt3:connection>`, `clientId` and `url` configurations look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the XML editor, the `<mqtt3:connection>`, `clientId`, and `url` configurations look like this:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mqtt3:config name="MQTT_Config">
    <mqtt3:connection clientId="smart-bentley-123" url="tcp://127.0.0.1:1883" />
</mqtt3:config>
----

> You can also specify each URL field separately for the connection by configuring the *MQTT3 Form Connection*, which enables you to specify a protocol, host and port to establish a connection with the broker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also specify each URL field separately for the connection by configuring the *MQTT3 Form Connection*, which enables you to specify a protocol, host, and port to establish a connection with the broker:
```

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
. Click *Create*.

> . In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the filter box, type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
```

. Click *OK*.
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select *MQTT3 Form Connection*.
. Set the following fields:
+
* *Client ID*: `smart-bentley-123`.
* *Username*: `username`.
* *Protocol*: `TCP (Default)`.
* *URL*: `127.0.0.1`.

> * *Port*: `1883`.

Reviewer: No final periods ^

[start=7]
. Click *OK*.

.MQTT3 Form Connection Configuration
image::mqtt3-form-connection.png[MQTT3 Form Connection configuration in Global Element Properties window]

> In the XML editor, the `<mqtt3:form-connection>`, `protocol`, `host`, `port` and `clientId` configurations look like these:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the XML editor, the `<mqtt3:form-connection>`, `protocol`, `host`, `port`, and `clientId` configurations look like these:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mqtt3:config name="MQTT_Form_Config">
    <mqtt3:form-connection clientId="smart-bentley-123" username="usertest" password="testpass" protocol="TCP" host="127.0.0.1" port="1883"/>
</mqtt3:config>
----

[[configure-protocol]]
== Configure a Connection Protocol

> MQTT supports protocols, that you can use to connect to and exchange MQTT messages with the broker. You can configure any of the following protocols in the connection string of the connector configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT supports protocols that you can use to connect to and exchange MQTT messages with the broker. You can configure any of the following protocols in the connection string of the connector configuration:
```

* *LOCAL*
* *SSL*
* *TCP (Default)*
* *WS*
* *WSS*

[[configure-authentication]]

> == Configure Credentials For Authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure Credentials for Authentication
```

> Authentication credentials are optional, but you can provide a username and a password if it is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authentication credentials are optional, but you can provide a username and a password if required.
```

In the following example, you configure the authentication by providing a basic username and password:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
. Click *Create*.

> . In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the filter box, type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
```

. Click *OK*.
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select *MQTT3 URL Connection*.
. Set the following fields:
+
* *Client ID*: `smart-bentley-123`.
* *Username*: `username`.
* *Password*: `passtest`.

> * *URL*: `tcp://127.0.0.1:1883"`.

Reviewer: no final periods ^

Reviewer: Is the repetition of this configuration step necessary here?

[start=7]
. Click *OK*.

> In the XML editor, the  `<mqtt3:connection>`, `username` and `password` configurations look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the XML editor, the  `<mqtt3:connection>`, `username`, and `password` configurations look like this:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mqtt3:config name="MQTT_Config">
    <mqtt3:connection clientId="smart-bentley-123" username="usertest" password="passtest" url="tcp://127.0.0.1:1883"/>
</mqtt3:config>
----

> You can also provide a client certificate to authenticate the connection by setting a TLS context.
> In the following example, you configure the TLS context:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also provide a client certificate to authenticate the connection by setting a TLS context:
```

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.

> . Select your MQTT3 Config and click *Edit*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select your *MQTT3 Config* and click *Edit*.
```

> . In the *MQTT3 Config*, click *SSL/TLS*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In *MQTT3 Config*, click *SSL/TLS*.
```

> . For *TLS Context* select *Edit inline*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. For *TLS Context*, select *Edit inline*.
```

. In *Trust Store Configuration*, set the following fields:
+
* *Path*: `tls/truststore.jks`.
* *Password*: `racing`.

> * *Type*: `jks"`.

Reviewer: No final periods in field names list ^

Reviewer: Is `jks"` correct, with both " and `?

[start=6]
. Click *OK*.

.MQTT3 TLS Context configuration
image::mqtt3-tls-configuration.png[MQTT3 TLS Context configuration in Global Element Properties window]

> In the XML editor, the `<tls:context>`,`path`, `password` and `type` configurations look like these:

Reviewer: series comma: GLOBAL
```suggestion
In the XML editor, the `<tls:context>`,`path`, `password`, and `type` configurations look like these:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mqtt3:config name="MQTT_TLS_Config">
    <mqtt3:connection clientId="smart-bentley-tls-123" username="usertest" password="passtest" url="ssl://localhost:8883" >
        <tls:context>
            <tls:trust-store path="tls/truststore.jks" password="racing" type="jks"/>
        </tls:context>
    </mqtt3:connection>
</mqtt3:config>
----

[[configure-failover]]

> == Configure a Fail-Over Server List

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure a Failover Server List
```

> There are certain deployment schemas that consist of multiple brokers working together in order to provide clients with several connection endpoints. When there is more than one available server that the client can connect to, there are two possible scenarios: either each MQTT server operates separately or they might work together and share a state (cluster mode), in which case, you might want to specify how the MQTT client behaves in the event of a reconnection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are certain deployment schemas that consist of multiple brokers working together to provide clients with several connection endpoints. When there is more than one available server that the client can connect to, there are two possible scenarios: either each MQTT server operates separately, or they might work together and share a state (cluster mode), in which case you might want to specify how the MQTT client behaves in the event of a reconnection.
```

When you provide a failover server list, the connector can iterate over the list until it successfully establishes a connection with one of the provided endpoints.

> In the following example, you configure the fail-over server list for an *MQTT3 Fail-Over Connection*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, you configure the failover server list for an *MQTT3 Fail-Over Connection*:
```

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
. Click *Create*.

> . In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the filter box, type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
```

. Click *OK*.
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select *MQTT3 Fail-Over Connection*.
. Set *Client ID* to `smart-bentley-123`.

> . In *Fail over servers* click the plus sign (*+*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In *Fail over servers*, click the plus sign (*+*).
```

. Set the following fields:
+

> * *Protocol*: `TCP (Default)`.
> * *Host*: `127.9.0.2`.
> * *Port*: `1883`.

Reviewer: GLOBAL:
```suggestion
* *Protocol*: `TCP (Default)`
* *Host*: `127.9.0.2`
* *Port*: `1883`
```

[start=9]
. Click *Finish*.

> . Repeat twice steps 7 - 9 and add new host and port values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Repeat Steps 7 through 9 twice to add the other new host and port values.
```

.MQTT3 Fail-Over Server List configuration
image::mqtt3-failover-serverlist.png[MQTT3 fail-Over Server List configuration in Global Element Properties window]

In the XML editor, the `<mqtt3:fail-over-connection>` and `<mqtt3:fail-over-url` configurations look like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mqtt3:config name="MQTT_FailOver_Config">
    <mqtt3:fail-over-connection clientId="smart-bentley-123" >
        <mqtt3:fail-over-servers >
            <mqtt3:fail-over-url protocol="TCP" host="127.9.0.2" port="1883"/>
            <mqtt3:fail-over-url protocol="TCP" host="127.0.0.3" port="1884"/>
            <mqtt3:fail-over-url protocol="TCP" host="127.0.0.1" port="1883"/>
        </mqtt3:fail-over-servers>
        </mqtt3:fail-over-connection>
</mqtt3:config>
----

[[configure-clean-session]]

> == Configure the Clean Session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure the Clean Session Value
```

> In the *MQTT3 Config* window, configure the *Clean session* field to `False` so the broker remembers the client the next time it connects. While the client is offline, all its subscriptions are saved, and Quality of Service (QoS) 1 and 2 messages that the client would want to receive are saved too, until the client reconnects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the *MQTT3 Config* window, configure the *Clean session* field to `False` so the broker remembers the client the next time it connects. While the client is offline, all its subscriptions are saved, and QoS 1 and QoS 2 messages that the client would want to receive are saved too, until the client reconnects.
```
or maybe just...:
```suggestion
In the *MQTT3 Config* window, configure the *Clean session* field to `False` so the broker remembers the client the next time it connects. While the client is offline, all its subscriptions and QoS 1 and 2 messages are saved until the client reconnects.
```

Some brokers support the clustering of MQTT brokers in which the nodes share a state. In this case, setting the clean session flag to `False` is useful if the node the connector happens to go offline. This enables the client to reconnect to a different node that is aware of the client's subscriptions so that any messages the connector might have missed while offline are delivered.

If the clean session is set to `True (Default)`, then when the connector disconnects, for whatever reason, all its subscriptions are dropped and the connector has to resubscribe upon reconnection. All messages sent while offline are lost.

In the following example, you configure the clean session:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
. Click *Create*.

> . In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the filter box, type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
```

. Click *OK*.
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select *MQTT3 URL Connection*.
. Set the following fields:
+

> * *Client ID*: `smart-bentley-123`.
> * *URL*: `tcp://127.0.0.1:1883`.
> * *Clean session*: `False`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Client ID*: `smart-bentley-123`
* *URL*: `tcp://127.0.0.1:1883`
* *Clean session*: `False`
```

[start=7]
. Click *OK*.

.MQTT3 Clean Session configuration
image::mqtt3-cleansession.png[MQTT3 Clean session configuration in Global Element Properties window]

In the XML editor, the `cleanSession` configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mqtt3:config name="MQTT_Config">
  <mqtt3:connection clientId="smart-bentley-123" url="tcp://127.0.0.1:1883">
      <mqtt3:connection-options cleanSession="false"/>
    </mqtt3:connection>
</mqtt3:config>
----

> 

Reviewer: Break here to commit

Reviewer: Resume

[[enable-file-persistence]]
== Enable File Persistence

> In the *MQTT3 Config* window, set the *Enable file persistence* field to `True` to enable the MQTT client to persist its state to a file that is used to store any outbound or inbound in-flight messages that the client might have with QoS ≥ 1. In contrast, if you set the field to `False (Default)`, the client state is saved only in memory and in the event of a crash the client is not be able to recover its state.

Reviewer: If this is a field, doesn't that mean that the user _types_ `True`?
Again, to me anyway, _set_ could be any one of a few actions, like clicking or selecting or providing a value by typing....

Reviewer: If we use _QoS ≥ 1_ here, maybe we should earlier as well? I suggest standardizing throughout.
If there are only QoS 1 and 2, this might be a little misleading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the *MQTT3 Config* window, set the *Enable file persistence* field to `True` to enable the MQTT client to persist its state to a file that is used to store any outbound or inbound in-flight messages that the client might have with QoS ≥ 1. In contrast, if you set the field to `False (Default)`, the client state is saved only in memory and, in the event of a crash, the client cannot recover its state.
```

Reviewer: These two sentences ^ are pretty complex, but I could not come up with a graceful way to simplify them.

In the following example, you enable the file persistence:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
. Click *Create*.

> . In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the filter box, type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
```

. Click *OK*.
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select *MQTT3 URL Connection*.
. Set the following fields:

> +

Reviewer: ditto no periods ending the following list items:

* *Client ID*: `smart-bentley-123`.
* *Clean session*: `False`.
* *Enable file persistence*: `True`.
[start=7]
. Set *Datastore* to `mqtt/store` to specify where you want the persistent store to be generated.
. Click *OK*.

.MQTT3 Enable File Persistence configuration
image::mqtt3-enablefilepersistence.png[MQTT3 Enable File Persistence configuration in Global Element Properties window]

In the XML editor, the `enableFilePersistence` and `dataStorePath` configurations look like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<mqtt3:config name="MQTT_Config">
  <mqtt3:connection clientId="smart-bentley-123">
       <mqtt3:connection-options cleanSession="false" enableFilePersistence="true" dataStorePath="mqtt/store"/>
    </mqtt3:connection>
</mqtt3:config>
----

[WARNING]

> If you set a dynamic client ID, MQTT 3 Connector will not be able to recover the persisted files in the event of a crash. You must set a client ID that will not change in the event of an application restart after a crash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you set a dynamic client ID, MQTT 3 Connector cannot recover the persisted files in the event of a crash. You must set a client ID that does not change in the event of an application restart after a crash.
```
Can we use just one consistent wording for crash/restart/service interruption/etc.?

[[configure-advanced-options]]
== Configure Advanced Connection Options

MQTT 3 Connector enables you to define multiple default parameters while consuming or publishing messages. This way, you can define a global default behavior for all the operations associated with the configurations.

> In the following example, you configure the keep alive internal and keep alive internal unit to set the maximum period of time that the connection is kept alive without any messages being exchanged between the client and broker. You also configure the maximum number of in-flight messages allowed:

Reviewer: "...the keep alive internal and keep alive internal unit..."?
```suggestion
In the following example, you configure a maximum keep-alive time between messages between the client and broker. You also configure the maximum number of in-flight messages allowed:
```

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
. Click *Create*.

> . In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the filter box, type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
```

. Click *OK*.
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select *MQTT3 URL Connection*.
. Set the following fields:

> +

Reviewer: ditto no periods below
